---
layout: post
title:  Intro to the Map System
---

Forced March hopes to reintroduce the old way of thinking of cartography. The heavy reliance on maps on strategy games is the result of applying modern perspectives on historical contexts. Instead, maps were only much recently used purely for navigation. Before the 18th century, maps were a form of art; they were highly stylized to appease those that can afford them. Forced March introduces a map system that restricts players in a way to produce an immersive experience as if players are truly standing on the battlefield.

The game is open world with a 2D, top-down view, zoomed-in map. At the maximum zoom level, which maps a part of the world that could extend thousands of kilometers, the map will be very large. Map details at that level is also the greatest. While players can zoom out, the game's clock speed runs faster at lower zoom levels, so that precise actions must be done at maximum zoom.

## Map Data

While the gameplay map is not tiled, such that players can move at any point on the map, raster maps are used underneath to supply data, so that each pixel gives specific properties on an area at the gameplay map covered by the ground resolution of that pixel. These raster maps should provide data for the maximum zoom level.

There are four categories of raster data: elevation, terrain, weather, and objects. Elevation maps, as the name suggests, are maps where each pixel contains a height value above (or below) the sea level. Terrain maps determine what type of climate should be present in a specific region. Examples of terrain maps include but are not limited to river maps which locate where the rivers and other freshwater sources are, average temperatures maps which source the temperatures for each pixel region, underground minerals maps which overall measure the degree of fertility of various regions. Terrain maps may also require data from elevation maps. 

So far, the first two categories are generally static, that is they are provided to the game engine and loaded on startup without expecting any modification later on in the game. The next two categories are dynamic, so they are more like save files where modifications are expected. Weather maps are the most computationally demanding of all the maps. They will require data from elevation as well as terrain maps. Weather maps compute the duration and amount of precipitation, sunshine, wind, and current temperature in real time on each region of the map. Object maps record anything that protrudes above or burrows below the local elevation, essentially offsetting the height value of a pixel. However, the difference between elevation and object maps are that elevation maps strictly records the surface of the world by recording the land height with respect to the sea level whereas object maps records temporary objects and other obstacles not part of the land. Examples of objects are trees, buildings, people, trenches, and tunnels, but permanent landscaping like landslides would overwrite the data on the elevation maps. Real time object movements will also be reflected on the object maps.

## A Character's View

At maximum zoom level, the player sees a terrain map as constructed from the map data. The extent of the part of the map visible to a character at one time as well as its degree of visibility depends on the "knowledge" of the character, a mechanic called geographic perception. There are a number of degrees of geographic perception in increasing obscurity. The various degrees are noticeable on the map as differentiated boundaries. 

On the terrain map, there are three levels of geographic perception: observation, conception, and the unknowns. Observation refers to the area in the world which the character can directly see from their position. The observation region is not a simple radial area, rather it takes into account the land height at the position of the character, the maximum posible radius due to curvature (AKA the horizon), and any obstacles. It is possible that there are chunks of the observation region that are not connected. Within the boundaries of the observation region, players can see movements of other objects and rely on the distances between two objects or land features as shown on this part of the map.

Conception refers to the ability to imagine. This part of the map lies beyond the observable boundary which represents areas of the world the character has seen first-hand or told to them. When a character walks past an area so that it is no longer in sight, it leaves behind a trail of conception region. A character may learn of foreign areas, which are represented as conception even without having visited them, through surveying and communicating with others. The detail in the conception is less than that in the observation and only includes but not limited to place names, place locations, prominent objects, lesser terrain detail, land features such as forests, mountains, rivers, etc. Areas that the character sees or visits most often will depict more detail than other conception areas that the character rarely or never sees. Most recently visited areas also contain more details. Details within the conception boundaries gradually fade. The rate and the minimum threshold at which details fade depend on how often the character sees the place as well as when they most recently visit it. Like the observation region, the conception region may have chunks that are not connected. Unlike the observation region, however, the conception region do not depict movements of objects and objects like people, animals, etc. Also unlike the observation region, players should not rely on the distances between two features within the conception region as realistically, distances are not truly expressed in memory thus they are depicted relatively on the map.

The unknowns are areas in the world that the character has absolutely no knowledge of. These are mostly outside the boundary of the conception region. The unknowns are blank and not really written on the map so the whole terrain map is seen as reaching only up to the boundary of the conception region. While most of the unknowns are beyond the conception region, in the case of a learned foreign land which is never visited such that they are represented as disconnected chunks of conception region, the unknowns are what disconnect the two chunks of the map. In order to truly immerse the unknown experience, the distances and areas of the unknowns are always universally trivially minimum. For example if there are two pairs of disconnected chunks by the unknowns, the unknown distances between the chunks in each pair appear equal even if the true distances are not. Therefore, whereas the conception region still at least depicts relative distances between features, the unknowns have no concept of distances. As a result, the final terrain map, including any conception region chunks, look like several map parts clustered at the center of the character.

At non-maximum zoom level, the map details are concealed. Instead, the terrain map is replaced with an atlas map with generalized land features and urban centers. These generalizations are similarly based on the geographic perception of the character well as the societal reflection. On the atlas map, only the last two of the geographic perceptions are depicted. The unknowns perform the same way as that in the terrain map. The conception region mostly perform the same way with exceptions. In the atlas map, the conception region only includes place names, place locations, and land features. Terrain details and any sort of objects are not depicted. Disconnected chunks also do not exist. As these also include a reflection of what the character's society knows so far, the location and place names are not entirely correctl; names may be bastardizations. In conclusion, the terrain map is character-centered, it represents the character's memory and its understanding of the world, whereas the atlas map is culture-centered, it represents the type of map that the society the character belongs to would typically produce.